Spec edits for incremental delivery, Response Section and Examples Appendix (#1203)
graphql/graphql-spec: spec/Section 7 -- Response.md

The _request error result_ map may also contain an entry with key `extensions`.
The value of this entry is described in the "Extensions" section.

### Initial Incremental Stream Result

:: An _initial incremental stream result_ contains the result of executing any
non-deferred selections, along with any errors that occurred during their
execution, as well as details of any future _incremental stream update result_
to be expected. An initial incremental stream result must be the first payload
yielded by an _incremental stream_.

An _initial incremental stream result_ must be a map.

The _initial incremental stream result_ must contain an entry with key {"data"},
and may contain entries with keys {"errors"} and {"extensions"}. The value of
these entries are defined in the same way as an _execution result_ as described
in the "Data", "Errors", and "Extensions" sections below.

The _initial incremental stream result_ must contain an entry with the key
{"hasNext"}. The value of this entry must be {true} if there are any
_incremental stream update results_ in the _incremental stream_. The value of
this entry must be {false} if the initial incremental stream result is the last

> response of the incremental stream.

Reviewer: Splitting this across two paragraphs is a little weird, I feel like the list of keys up front should be exhaustive.

```suggestion
The _initial incremental stream result_ must contain an entries with keys {"data"} and {"hasNext"}, and may contain entries with keys
{"errors"}, {"pending"}, {"incremental"}, {"completed"}, and {"extensions"}.

The value of {"data"}, {"errors"} and {"extensions"} are defined in the
same way as an _execution result_ as described in the "Data", "Errors", and
"Extensions" sections below.

The value of the {"hasNext"} entry must be {false}
if the initial incremental stream result is the last response of the incremental
stream. Otherwise, {"hasNext"} must be {true}.
```

I'd like to see a non-normative note below this explaining that {"hasNext"} is required only for it to be an initial incremental stream result, and that omitting it is valid if it's the only result, just that it means it's an execution result instead (i.e. there's no "incremental" at all). In this case, the GraphQL response would not return a stream.

This is a terrible version of that note since I'm writing this already over-time on our call...

Note: Omitting {"hasNext"} would make the response a regular _execution result_, which is valid only when returned directly and not as part of a stream.

Author: This suggested edit changes pending from required to optional on the initial incremental stream result, I don't think we have a case for an incremental stream without a pending? I will keep it as required when I incorporate this change.

Do you still think we need a note about omitting hasNext? it's a bit more complicated as you also need to omit pending?

I will however add a note explaining the reasoning for allowing hasNext: false in the initial incremental stream result

The _initial incremental stream result_ must contain an entry with the key
{"pending"}. The value of this entry must be a non-empty list of _pending
result_. Each _pending result_ must be a map as described in the "Pending

> Result" section below.

Reviewer: If "hasNext" is true, pending _must_ be present.
~~If "hasNext" is false, pending _must not_ be present.~~ < Not true, could be hasNext:false along with pending:[...],incremental:[...],completed:[...]

Author: Going to leave this as is since `pending` must be present in all cases for the initial incremental stream result

The _initial incremental stream result_ may contain an entry with they key
{"incremental"}. The value of this entry must be a non-empty list of
_incremental result_. Each _incremental result_ must be a map as described in

> the "Incremental Result" section below.

Reviewer: I'd add a non-normative note detailing why this is allowed.

Reviewer: Same for "completed"

Author: Note added here: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1203/changes#diff-98d0cd153b72b63c417ad4238e8cc0d3385691ccbde7f7674bc0d2a718b896ecR116-R126

as well as details of any future _incremental stream update result_ to be
expected. All payloads yielded by an _incremental stream_, except the first,
must be incremental stream update results.

An _incremental stream update result_ must be a map.

Unlike the _initial incremental stream result_, an _incremental stream update
result_ must not contain entries with keys {"data"} or {"errors"}.

An _incremental stream update result_ may contain an entry with the key
{"extensions"}. The value of this entry is described in the "Extensions"
section.

An _incremental stream update result_ must contain an entry with the key
{"hasNext"}. The value of this entry must be {true} for all but the last
response in the _incremental stream_. The value of this entry must be {false}
for the last response of the incremental stream.

The _incremental stream update result_ may contain entries with keys
{"pending"}, {"incremental"}, and/or {"completed"}. The value of these entries
are defined in the same way as an _initial incremental stream result_ as
described in the "Pending Result", "Incremental Result", and "Completed Result"

> sections below.

Reviewer: Should we add that `{"hasNext": true}` alone is invalid?

I propose that we *do not* do so. Not doing so allows `{"hasNext: true}` to be used as a keepalive.

Author: Agreed, do you think we should specifically mention this, outside of every other entry being defined as optional?

When a _response path_ is present on an _error result_, it identifies the
_response position_ which raised the error.

When a _response path_ is present on an _incremental result_, it identifies the
_response position_ of the incremental data update.

> 

Reviewer: ... _can_ a response path be present on an _incremental result_? Maybe you mean _pending result_?

_incremental stream_.

:: The _associated pending result_ is a specific _pending result_ associated
with any given _incremental result_ or _completed result_. The associated
pending result can be determined by finding the pending result where the value
of its {"id"} entry is the same value of the {"id"} entry of the given
incremental result or completed result. The associated pending result must
appear in the _incremental stream_, in the same or prior _initial execution
result_ or _execution update result_ as the given incremental result or
completed result.

### Incremental Result

:: The _incremental result_ is used to deliver data that the GraphQL service has
chosen to incrementally deliver. An incremental result may be ether an
_incremental list result_ or an _incremental object result_.

An _incremental result_ must be a map.

Every _incremental result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"} with a
string value. The definition of _associated pending result_ describes how this
value is used to determine the associated pending result for a given
_incremental result_.

#### Incremental List Result

> :: An _incremental list result_ is a _incremental result_ used to deliver

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:: An _incremental list result_ is an _incremental result_ used to deliver
```

to determine the _associated pending result_ for this _incremental result_.

Every _incremental list result_ must contain an {"items"} entry. The {"items"}
entry must contain a list of additional list items for the list field in the
incremental list result's _response position_. The value of this entry must be a
list of the same type of the response field at this _response position_.

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in
{"items"} and these errors propagate to a _response position_ higher than the
_incremental list result_'s response position, The incremental list result is
considered failed and should not be included in the _incremental stream_. The
errors that caused this failure will be included in a _completed result_.

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in
{"items"} and these errors did not propagate to a path higher than the
_incremental list result_'s path, the incremental list result must contain an
entry with key {"errors"} containing these execution errors. The value of this
entry is described in the "Errors" section.

#### Incremental Object Result

> :: An _incremental object result_ is a _incremental result_ used to deliver

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:: An _incremental object result_ is an _incremental result_ used to deliver
```

### Extensions

The {"extensions"} entry in an _execution result_, _request error result_,
_initial incremental stream result_, or an _incremental stream update result_,
if set, must have a map as its value. This entry is reserved for implementers to
extend the protocol however they see fit, and hence there are no additional
restrictions on its contents.

### Pending Result

:: A _pending result_ is used to communicate to clients that the GraphQL service
has chosen to incrementally deliver data associated with a `@defer` or `@stream`
directive. Each pending result corresponds to a specific `@defer` or `@stream`
directive located at a _response position_ in the response data. The presence of
a pending result indicates that clients should expect the associated data in
either the current response, or one of the following responses.

**Pending Result Format**

A _pending result_ must be a map.

Every _pending result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"} with a string
value. This {"id"} should be used by clients to correlate pending results with

> _incremental result_ and _completed result_. The {"id"} value must be unique for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_incremental result_ and _completed result_. The {"id"} value must be unique across
```

the entire _incremental stream_ response. There must not be any other pending

> result in the _incremental stream_ that contains the same {"id"}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
result in the _incremental stream_ with the same {"id"}.
```

If the associated `@defer` or `@stream` directive contains a `label` argument,
the pending result must contain an entry {"label"} with the value of this
argument. Clients should use this entry to differentiate the _pending results_
for different deferred fragments at the same _response position_.

If a pending result is not returned for a `@defer` or `@stream` directive,
clients must assume that the GraphQL service chose not to incrementally deliver
this data, and the data can be found either in the {"data"} entry in the
_initial incremental stream result_, or one of the prior _incremental stream
update result_ in the _incremental stream_.

:: The _associated pending result_ is a specific _pending result_ associated
with any given _incremental result_ or _completed result_. The associated
pending result can be determined by finding the pending result where the value
of its {"id"} entry is the same value of the {"id"} entry of the given
incremental result or completed result. The associated pending result must
appear in the _incremental stream_, in the same or prior _initial incremental
stream result_ or _execution update result_ as the given incremental result or

> completed result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:: The _associated pending result_ of an _incremental result_ or _completed
result_ is the _pending result_ whose {"id"} entry has the same value as the
{"id"} entry of the given incremental result or completed result.
```

### Incremental Result

:: The _incremental result_ is used to deliver data that the GraphQL service has
chosen to incrementally deliver. An incremental result may be either an
_incremental list result_ or an _incremental object result_.

An _incremental result_ must be a map.

Every _incremental result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"} with a
string value. The definition of _associated pending result_ describes how this
value is used to determine the associated pending result for a given

> _incremental result_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every _incremental result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"}, the value
of which is a string referencing its _associated pending result_. The associated
pending result must appear either in the _initial incremental stream result_,
in a prior _incremental stream updated result_, or in the same _incremental
stream updated result_ as the _incremental result_ that references it.
```

#### Incremental List Result

:: An _incremental list result_ is an _incremental result_ used to deliver
additional list items for a list field with a `@stream` directive. The
_associated pending result_ for this _incremental list result_ must be
associated with a `@stream` directive.

The _response position_ for an _incremental list result_ is the {"path"} entry
from its _associated pending result_.

**Incremental List Result Format**

Every _incremental list result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"}, used
to determine the _associated pending result_ for this _incremental result_.

> 

Reviewer: Already covered in _incremental result_?

```suggestion
```

Every _incremental list result_ must contain an {"items"} entry. The {"items"}
entry must contain a list of additional list items for the list field in the
incremental list result's _response position_. The value of this entry must be a
list of the same type of the response field at this _response position_.

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in
{"items"} and these errors propagate to a _response position_ higher than the
_incremental list result_'s response position, the incremental list result is
considered failed and should not be included in the _incremental stream_. The

> errors that caused this failure will be included in a _completed result_.

Reviewer: This doesn't feel like the right wording for error propagation here ("response position higher than ..." doesn't feel right) but it's too late at night right now for me to figure out the correct wording.

Author: Updating to 
> and these errors propagate to a parent _response position_ of the _incremental list result_'s response position

`parent` and `sibling` are used in the execution section

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in
{"items"} and these errors did not propagate to a path higher than the
_incremental list result_'s path, the incremental list result must contain an
entry with key {"errors"} containing these execution errors. The value of this

> entry is described in the "Errors" section.

Reviewer: Should we add a non-normative (or normative, maybe) note to say that the response path of these errors will always start with the response position followed by an index? Want to make sure that no-one attempts to attach the error directly to the list, for example.

Author: I added more detail to this section that I think makes this more clear.

#### Incremental Object Result

:: An _incremental object result_ is an _incremental result_ used to deliver
additional response fields that were contained in one or more fragments with a
`@defer` directive. The _associated pending result_ for this _incremental object
result_ must be associated with a `@defer` directive.

**Incremental Object Result Format**

The _incremental object result_ may contain a {"subPath"} entry. If this entry
is present, the incremental object result's _response position_ can be
determined by concatenating the value of the _associated pending result_'s
{"path"} entry with the value of this {"subPath"} entry. If no {"subPath"} entry
is present, the _response position_ is the value of the associated pending

> result's {"path"} entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _incremental object result_ may contain a {"subPath"} entry. If such an entry
is present, the _response position_ of the incremental object result is the
result of appending the value of this {"subPath"} to the value of the {"path"}
entry of the _associated pending result_. If no {"subPath"} entry is present, the
_response position_ is the value of the associated pending result's {"path"}
entry.
```

An _incremental object result_ may be used to deliver data for response fields

> that were contained in more than one deferred fragments. In that case, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that were contained in more than one deferred fragment. In that case, the
```

_associated pending result_ of the incremental object result must be a _pending

> result_ with the longest {"path"}.

Reviewer: This is insufficiently precise; it must relate to the deferred fragment. Further, is there a way in which this can be broken when combined with adding incremental/completed to the initial incremental execution result through eager execution and maybe nested fragments? I feel like you might asynchronously complete the requirements and reference a short path, and then a long path comes about later (whilst still executing the non-deferred selection set)...

Author: Updated this section to be more precise.

I think since we know about all of the deferred fields after collect fields, the server should always be able to tell which is the longest pending path regardless of the execution order.

Every _incremental object result_ must contain a {"data"} entry. The {"data"}
entry must contain a map of additional response fields. The {"data"} entry in an
incremental object result will be of the type of the field at the incremental

> object result's _response position_.

Reviewer: "will be of the type of the field" feels wrong. The field may be `User` but if the selection set is `{ foo: username }` then the "type" is `{ foo: String }`. It's more about the execution of the selections than the type of the field. (Similar concern for lists.)

Author: I was basing it off of this existing section, where we say the root data is either the query or mutation root operation type:

> If the operation was a query, this output will be an
object of the query root operation type; if the operation was a mutation, this
output will be an object of the mutation root operation type.

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in
{"data"} and these errors propagated to a _response position_ higher than the
_incremental object result_'s response position, the incremental object result
is considered failed and should not be included in the incremental stream. The

> errors that caused this failure will be included in a _completed result_.

Reviewer: Is "errors" correct? I think not: when response bubbling causes a selection set to be destroyed you only get one error independent of how many bubbled, and I think that should be the same here?

```suggestion
error that caused this failure will be included in a _completed result_.
```

If any _execution error_ were raised during the execution of the results in

> {"data"} and these errors did not propagate to a _response position_ higher than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{"data"} and no such error propagated to a _response position_ higher than
```

the _incremental object result_'s response position, the incremental object
result must contain an entry with key {"errors"} containing these execution
errors. The value of this entry is described in the "Errors" section.

### Completed Result

:: A _completed result_ is used to communicate that the GraphQL service has
completed the incremental delivery of the data associated with the _associated
pending result_. The corresponding data must have been completed in the same
_initial incremental stream result_ or _incremental stream update result_ in
which this completed result appears.

**Completed Result Format**

A _completed result_ must be a map.

Every _completed result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"} with a string
value. The definition of _associated pending result_ describes how this value is

> used to determine the associated pending result for a given _completed result_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every _completed result_ must contain an entry with the key {"id"}, the
value of which is a string referencing its _associated pending result_. The
associated pending result must appear either in the _initial incremental stream
result_, in a prior _incremental stream updated result_, or in the same
_incremental stream updated result_ as the _completed result_ that references
it.
```

A _completed result_ may contain an {"errors"} entry. When the {"errors"} entry
is present, it informs clients that the delivery of the data from the
_associated pending result_ has failed, due to an execution error propagating to
a _response position_ higher than the _incremental result_'s response position.
The {"errors"} entry must contain these execution errors. The value of this

> entry is described in the "Errors" section.

Reviewer: 🤔  Can errors ever contain more than one error?

Answer: yes - for defer there be many associated selection sets at different levels, and multiple of these may fail due to error propagation.

### Additional Entries

To ensure future changes to the protocol do not break existing services and
clients, any of the maps described in the "Response" section (with the exception
of {"extensions"}) must not contain any entries other than those described

> above. Clients must ignore any entries other than those described above.

Reviewer: We could probably upstream this change.
